=== PAGE 1 ===
1
Optimizing Code with Language Models: An
Agent based Approach
Sharoz Haseeb 21-7226
Department of Computer Science
National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences
Lahore, Pakistan
sharozhaseeb1@gmail.com
I. Abstract
This paper presents an innovative approach to
code optimization through an agent-based frame-
work powered by advanced language models. Our
framework utilizes specialized agents to enhance code
efficiency, readability, and maintainability while pre-
serving functionality. We demonstrate significant im-
provements in code performance and adaptability
to diverse scenarios. The integration of language
models, including GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, enhances
decision-making and context-aware code optimiza-
tions. This approach extends to code review au-
tomation, debugging assistance, and code synthesis,
with an extensible framework that supports addi-
tional agents and multi-language capabilities. While
transformative, ethical and security considerations
are addressed. Our work aligns with the vision of
a more efficient, readable, and innovative future for
software development.
II. Introduction
A. Background and Motivation
The ever-evolving landscape of software development
necessitates efficient and optimized code. Software
applications have grown increasingly intricate, and
the demand for faster, resource-efficient solutions
continues to surge. Traditional methods of code op-
timization often require a labor-intensive and time-
consuming manual process. Developers rely on their
domain expertise, rigorous analysis, and intricate
refactoring to achieve performance enhancements.
However, advanced AI techniques has begun to trans-
form this landscape. In particular, SOTA LLMs,
have emerged as powerful tools for natural language
understanding and generation. These models, trained
on vast volumes of textual data from the internet,
possess remarkable capabilities for processing and
generating human language.
To use LLMs for code optimization, an agent-based
approach has gained prominence. An agent, in this
context, serves as an intelligent, autonomous entity
capable of understanding, analyzing, and proposing
according to their base tasks. These agents can work
in tandem with human developers, significantly ex-
pediting the optimization process and enhancing its
overall effectiveness.
Our main motivation behind this research is to
explore how agent-based approaches can improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of code optimization
using LLMs. The agent serves as an intermediary,
interpreting the developer’s needs and using the lan-
guage model’s capabilities to automate & streamline
the optimization process. This not only reduces the
human effort required but also opens the door to
more sophisticated optimization strategies that may
be challenging to achieve manually.
Moreover, the choice of language model plays a criti-
cal role in this context. Different LLMs, such as GPT-
3, GPT-4, or domain-specific models, offer varying
degrees of language understanding and generation
capabilities. The model chosen will impact the code
optimization process within an agent-based frame-
work, influencing the adaptability and performance
of the system as the agents require a level of critical
thinking capability which smaller parameter LLMs
may not be capable of.
In addition to model selection, the versatility of
agent-based approaches is another area of explo-
ration. It is essential to determine whether these
approaches are capable of optimizing code for a wide
range of programming languages or if they exhibit su-
perior performance in specific programming contexts
or domains. For the scope of the current research we
will observe how they perform on Python specifically.
By addressing these questions and challenges, this
research aims to unveil a transformative approach
to code optimization, employing agent-based frame-

=== PAGE 2 ===
2
works that utilize LLMs to their complete potential.
The utilization of agents in this context has the
potential to revolutionize the software development
process, enabling developers to create more efficient,
maintainable, and high-quality software solutions
B. Research Questions
In this chapter, we will address several key research
questions that guide our exploration of agent-based
code optimization using language models:
1) How can agent-based approaches enhance the effi-
ciency and effectiveness of code optimization using
language models?
Our main goal is to find out how agent-based ap-
proaches can greatly improve the efficiency of opti-
mizing code utilizing language models. We will look
at the possible benefits and drawbacks of using these
intelligent agents in software development.
2) How do different types of language models, such
as ChatGPT compare in results to an agent-based
framework?
There are many different types of language models,
from domain-specific models designed for specific
purpose to general purpose models like GPT-4. We
will investigate the affects of the language model
selection and the addition of agents on the process
of optimizing code.
C. Contribution and Significance
We suggest a method for optimizing code that uses a
multi-agent pipeline with elements like an optimizer,
test case generator and a profiler. With its automated
approach to code optimization at the code base level,
this agent-based architecture has the potential to
completely change how software engineers improve
the maintainability and efficiency of their code. A
overview of the pipeline and its importance in re-
lation to code optimization will be given in this
chapter.
III. Related Work
A. Code optimization techniques
Python is a high-level language that is often praised
for its ease of use and readability. However, Python
code is slower compared to lower-level languages like
C++. So, optimizing Python code is an important
consideration for many applications. In this section,
we discuss some common techniques used to optimize
Python code, with examples to illustrate each tech-
nique.
1) Use Built-in Functions
Many performance-optimized built-in functions are
available in Python. Not developing your own func-
tions is most of the times a good way to save write
time and enhance performance. For example, con-
sider the following code that sums up the numbers
in a list:
nums = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
total = 0
for num in nums:
total += num
print(total)
This code loops over a list of numbers and adds each
one to a running total. But, a more optimized version
of this code would use the built-in sum() function:
nums = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
total = sum(nums)
print(total)
This code achieves the same result as the previous
code, but is much faster and more concise.
2) Use List Comprehensions
List comprehensions is a minimal syntax efficient way
to generate lists in Python. It is a better replacement
for slower methods of generating lists. For example,
consider the following code that generates a list of
squares:
squares = []
for num in range(1, 6):
squares.append(num ** 2)
print(squares)
This code loops over a range of numbers and calcu-
lates the square of each number then appends to a
list. However, a better version of this code would use
list comprehension:
squares = [num ** 2 for num in range(1, 6)]
print(squares)
3) Use Generators
Generators are a type of iterator which are used
to generate a sequence of values on runtime, rather
than generating a complete list all at once. This is
more memory-efficient than generating a complete
list, particularly for large datasets. For example,
consider the following code that generates a list of
even numbers:

=== PAGE 3 ===
3
evens = []
for num in range(1, 101):
if num % 2 == 0:
evens.append(num)
print(evens)
This code loops over a list of numbers and checks
if each one is even, then appends it to a list. But,
a more optimized version of this code would use a
generator expression.
B. Use Built-in Data Structures
Python provides several built-in data structures that
are optimized for performance, which include lists,
dictionaries, and sets. It is recommended to use these
data structures instead of creating your own as it
will improve performance. For example, consider the
following code that counts the frequency of words in
a list:
words = ['apple', 'banana', 'apple']
freqs = {}
for word in words:
if word in freqs:
freqs[word] += 1
else:
freqs[word] = 1
print(freqs)
This code iterates over a list of words and counts the
occurence of each word, using a dictionary to store
the results. However, a more optimized version of this
code would use the built-in collections.Counter
class:
from collections import Counter
words = ['apple', 'banana', 'apple']
freqs = Counter(words)
print(freqs)
1) Use Cython
Cython is a programming language that is a superset
of Python, with syntax; which is similar to Python
but with the ability to use C data types. Cython
can write Python extensions, that are much faster
than vanilla Python code. For example consider the
following code that calculates the sum of the first
million integers:
total = 0
for i in range(1, 1000001):
total += i
print(total)
This code iterates over a range of numbers and
calculates the sum of each number, then adds it to a
running total. But a more optimized version of this
code would use Cython:
cpdef long cython_sum( int n):
cdef long total = 0
for i in range(1, n + 1):
total += i
return total
print(cython_sum(1000000))
This code achieves the same result as the previous
code, but is much faster due to the use of C data
types and the ability to compile the code to machine
code.
These are some of the techniques that can be used
to optimize Python code. By considering the per-
formance implications of your code and using these
techniques where appropriate, you can significantly
improve the speed and efficiency of your Python
programs
IV. Large language models and their
applications
A. Brief history and evolution of large language mod-
els
LLMs have been in experimental phase since re-
searchers first started exploring avenues to generate
and understand natural language. Significant ad-
vancements in this field, however, did not occur until
the late 20th century thanks to statistical language
modeling approaches and the accessibility of enor-
mous text data corpora.
In late 90’s Hidden Markov Model was introduced
which became one of the most influential models.
The statistical structure of natural language can be
represented by HMMs, a sort of probabilistic model
that has been applied to several language processing
tasks such as text generation, machine translation,
and speech recognition.
In the 2000s researchers began to move towards
neural network-based language models, which proved
to be more powerful and versatile than HMMs. Next
came RNN which quickly became the standard for
sequence data, such as sentences or paragraphs and
increases the context window of the model.
Then in 2018 OpenAI released GPT (Generative
Pretrained Transformer) then LLM’s could’nt be
ingnored anymore due to better than ever genera-
tion quality. The GPT model uses a variant of the
Transformer architecture which was originally for

=== PAGE 4 ===
4
machine translation tasks to generate high-quality
natural language text.
Since the release of GPT, there has been an influx of
research in the area of language models with many
new models being developed and new applications
being explored. Some of the most notable models
include GPT-2, which is a larger and more powerful
version of first iteration of GPT, and BERT (Bidirec-
tional Encoder Representations from Transformers),
these models can be finetuned on downstream tasks
easily.
Overall, the evolution of large language models has
been driven by a combination of advances in ml algos,
the availability of large amounts of data and the
development of more powerful hardware for training
and inference. As time goes on we will see more
progress in GPUs and other hardware which will
enable more research potential in LLMs.
B. Overview of current applications and research
directions
Currently, large language models have a wide range
of applications in various fields, including natural
language processing, computer vision, speech recog-
nition, and robotics. In NLP, large language models
have been used for tasks such as language generation,
language translation, sentiment analysis, and ques-
tion answering etc. Nowadays GPT’s newest iterta-
tion can create text which is very close to human
written text.
In computer vision, large language models have been
used for tasks such as image captioning, object de-
tection, and image recognition. For example, the
ViLBERT (Vision-and-Language BERT) model can
understand both text and image inputs and perform
tasks such as image captioning by generating natural
language descriptions of the images.
Another application of large language models is in
speech recognition, where models such as the Con-
former have been used to transcribe audio into text.
Like wise Robotics is also an other emerging area
of interest where LLMs are being used, with mod-
els such as the Transformer-based Robot Language
Model (T-RoLM) is used to generate natural lan-
guage commands for autonomous robots.
Nowadays one of the recent applications of large
language models is Github Copilot, a tool developed
by Github and OpenAI that uses the GPT-3 model
to generate code suggestions for developers. It can be
easily integrated into a code editor such as VsCode
and can generate code snippets, function definitions,
and even entire programs based on natural language
descriptions provided by the user usually as code
comments. This tool provides a pipeline which can
act as a junior dev to the programmer and help
automate tasks.
In addition to its current applications, there is mas-
sive potential in the field of large language models.
One of the most promising areas is the development
of models that can understand and generate multi-
modal data, such as text and images. For exam-
ple, the CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image Pre-
training) model can classify images based on descrip-
tions and can also describe images. These models will
be the first step into achieving AGI in the future.
Another important direction is the development of
models that can learn from smaller amounts of data,
which makes it easier to use these models in real-
world applications. The Meta-Learning for Few-Shot
Learning (MAML) algorithm is an example of a
technique which learns a using a small number of dat-
apoints, which has been successfully applied to tasks
such as image classification and language modeling.
There is also significant interest in developing models
that are more interpretable and transparent, so that
users can better understand how the model is making
its predictions. These models are very crucial to
industries such as healtcare and finance as it helps fix
models faster it we know what causes it to provide
a false positive or a true negative. To cater to this
, the Explainable Language Understanding Model
(ELUM) is used which is a model that can gener-
ate natural language explanations of its predictions,
making it easier for users to understand how the
model is making its decisions.
Overall, the field of large language models is cur-
rently the most evolving, with many new applications
and research being published each day. As the tech-
nology continues to advance, it has the potential to
transform many aspects of our lives, from the way
we communicate to the way we work and learn etc.
V. Literature Review
A. A Survey on Large Language Model based Au-
tonomous Agents[1]
In recent months, there has been an exponential
growth of interest in developing autonomous agents
powered by large language models. LLMs such as
GPT-3 have demonstrated strong capabilities in
language understanding, reasoning, and generation.
This has inspired researchers to utilize LLMs as cen-
tral decision makers of multiple autonomous agents
to accomplish multiple tasks.
This paper provides the first comprehensive survey
on LLM-based autonomous agents. It systematically

=== PAGE 5 ===
5
reviews the construction, applications, and evalu-
ation of such agents based on over 100 relevant
studies. The survey categorizes existing work and
provides an in-depth analysis of the key techniques
and methodologies. It also discusses open challenges
and future directions which will help future research
in this emerging field.
The survey first focuses on an agent’s architecture
design. It proposes a unified framework that encap-
sulates the diverse architectures from prior studies.
This framework consists of four modules profiling,
memory, planning, and action. The profiling mod-
ule specifies the agent’s attributes and roles. The
memory module stores agent experiences to facilitate
reasoning. The planning module decomposes tasks
and makes action strategies while the action module
executes the agent’s decisions.
The survey discusses various techniques used to im-
plement each module, such as different memory for-
mats and planning methods. It highlights innovative
designs like incorporating both short-term and long-
term memories. The analysis reveals how specialized
architectures can enable agents to perceive environ-
ments, accumulate knowledge, deliberate plans, and
take informed actions.
Next, the survey examines strategies for agent ca-
pability acquisition. It categorizes them into fine-
tuning-based and non-fine-tuning methods. Fine-
tuning allows incorporating task-specific knowledge
by training on human-annotated, LLM-generated, or
real-world datasets. Non-fine-tuning techniques in-
clude prompt engineering to describe desired capabil-
ities and mechanism engineering to develop custom
modules.
The survey notes that fine-tuning can equip agents
with substantial domain knowledge but requires
open-source Models. In contrast, non-fine-tuning
methods can handle both open and closed models
but are limited by the context window. This analysis
provides insights into tailoring capability acquisition
for different scenarios.
The survey summarizes the applications of LLM-
based agents in three main domains - social science,
natural science, and engineering. In social science,
agents assist research tasks and simulate human
societies for studying social phenomena. In natural
science, they aid experimentation, data management,
and science education. In engineering, agents demon-
strate strengths in software development, industrial
automation, and robotics.
For each application domain, the survey highlights
innovative systems and use cases enabled by agents.
It reveals how agents can augment human capa-
bilities through natural language interaction across
diverse fields. This overview showcases the versatility
and potential of LLM-based agents.
Finally, the survey discusses subjective and objective
evaluation techniques for these agents. Subjective
methods like human assessments offer qualitative
insights but can be inefficient. Objective approaches
using metrics and benchmarks enable quantitative
measurement but may not fully capture all agent
capabilities.
The survey describes innovative evaluation protocols
leveraging simulations, games, and human studies. It
also introduces specialized benchmarks tailored for
assessing agent performance. This analysis provides
a holistic perspective on evaluating agent abilities.
In conclusion, the survey identifies key challenges in
role-playing, human alignment, prompt design, hallu-
cination, knowledge scope, and efficiency. It suggests
potential solutions like fine-tuning, mechanism engi-
neering, and incorporating human feedback. The sur-
vey notes that LLM-based agents remain an emerg-
ing field with ample room for future advancements.
Overall, this paper delivers an outstanding overview
of the state-of-the-art in LLM-based autonomous
agents. It establishes fundamental taxonomies and
provides insightful technical and application analy-
ses. The comprehensive literature analysis and dis-
cussion of open problems will prove valuable for
researchers and practitioners aiming to advance this
promising area.
B. MetaGPT[2]
Recent advances in large language models have
shown promise for multi-agent systems that can col-
laborate to solve complex tasks. However, existing
works have limitations in achieving coherent and
structured interactions between agents. This litera-
ture review analyzes prior research on LLM-based
multi-agent systems and automatic programming,
highlighting key challenges and opportunities.
A number of studies have explored using LLMs in
multi-agent settings. ChatDev created a simulation
with 25 agents to study social dynamics. While in-
teresting for sociological insights, it lacked complex
collaborative problem solving. [11] proposed using
smaller LLMs as ”tool users” directed by larger
”tool maker” models to improve efficiency. However,
coordination remained limited.
Other works focused on enhancing collective rea-
soning and discussion through agent debates and
dialogues [12] enabled verbal communication and
collaboration between agents. While promising, these

=== PAGE 6 ===
6
conversational systems struggled with coherence, un-
productive loops, and directing purposeful interac-
tions.
Most relevant are efforts on collaborative program-
ming agents [13]. However, they relied heavily on
free-form dialogues rather than incorporating human
teamwork insights. As MetaGPT notes, this led to
issues in complex tasks.
Significant innovations in program synthesis using
LLMs have emerged, including Alpha Code, Codex
, and others. Execution-guided approaches like La-
tent Execution enhance results by incorporating run-
time feedback. However, single-agent programming
models remain limited in handling complex software
projects.
Other studies explored agent-based programming
but lacked advanced process design. AutoGPT auto-
mated tasks through goal decomposition but strug-
gled with validation. LangChain combined LLMs
with computational tools, yet focused solely on code
generation rather than holistic workflows.
In summary, prior LLM-based multi-agent and pro-
gramming systems made valuable progress but faced
challenges with coherence, validation, and incor-
porating real-world teamwork processes. MetaGPT
aims to address these limitations through an innova-
tive integration of SOPs and meta programming.
MetaGPT introduces a novel approach to organiz-
ing LLM-based multi-agent collaboration using meta
programming and SOPs. It encodes specialized roles,
actions, workflows, and standardized outputs based
on human team practices. This facilitates structured
coordination and execution.
Specifically, MetaGPT defines comprehensive agent
roles to equip them with domain expertise. The
roles interact through a shared environment, storing
and retrieving messages relevant to their responsibili-
ties. Actions encapsulate modular sub-tasks based on
SOPs and output templates guide structured results.
This framework orchestrates purposeful agent co-
ordination, reducing miscommunication. The design
integrates real-world insights absent in prior systems.
Experiments demonstrate MetaGPT’s state-of-the-
art performance on collaborative software engineer-
ing tasks.
In summary, this review analyzes existing LLM-
based multi-agent and programming systems, high-
lighting key limitations MetaGPT addresses through
its innovative integration of SOPs, predefined roles,
and meta programming. By more closely mirroring
real-world team coordination, MetaGPT represents
a promising new approach to enhancing coherence,
productivity, and complexity handling in AI agent
collaboration and software automation.
C. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Hu-
man Behavior[3]
The paper introduces the concept of generative
agents, which are interactive computational agents
that can simulate human behavior in a believable
way. Generative agents have the potential to be
used in many applications, from virtual worlds to
prototyping tools, but creating them poses significant
technical challenges. The key challenges are enabling
the agents to maintain coherence over time, retrieve
and synthesize relevant memories, and plan actions
that are appropriate for dynamic and evolving situ-
ations.
A major thread in human-computer interaction and
artificial intelligence research has focused on creat-
ing believable proxies of human behavior in interac-
tive systems. Early visions of believable agents were
proposed in gaming for non-player characters that
could navigate complex relationships and interac-
tions . Cognitive architectures like SOAR and ACT-
R aimed to endow agents with robust cognitive capa-
bilities for perceiving, planning, and acting. However,
manually scripting behaviors limits generalization,
while reinforcement learning approaches face chal-
lenges in open worlds.
Recent progress in large language models like GPT-
3 provides new opportunities for simulating human
behavior, as the models implicitly encode a wide
range of behaviors from training data. However,
existing techniques rely on constrained prompting
that provide situational context but fail to ensure
coherence over time. The paper argues that an agent
architecture is needed to manage long-term memories
and experiences.
The proposed architecture combines a large lan-
guage model with a memory stream that maintains a
comprehensive history of the agent’s experiences. It
implements retrieval to identify relevant memories,
reflection to synthesize experiences into higher-level
inferences, and planning to create coherent sequences
of actions. Together, these components aim to enable
agents that can perceive, remember, reason, and act
in a human-like way.
The paper evaluates the architecture in a Sims-
style sandbox environment with 25 agents over 2
simulated days. Quantitative analysis shows the full
architecture produces more believable behaviors than
ablated versions without reflection or planning. Qual-
itative analysis reveals emergent social behaviors like
relationship formation and coordination. The most

=== PAGE 7 ===
7
common errors stemmed from improper memory re-
trieval and inherited quirks of the language model.
In conclusion, this paper makes important contribu-
tions around the architecture and interaction pat-
terns needed to create believable proxies of human
behavior using large language models. The evalu-
ations provide promising evidence that generative
agents can simulate coherent individual behaviors
and social dynamics over time. Further work is
needed to scale up the agents and enhance their
robustness.
D. CAMEL: Communicative Agents for ’Mind’ Ex-
ploration of Large Scale Language Model Soci-
ety[4]
The paper introduces the concept of communicative
agents that can autonomously cooperate to complete
tasks using natural language conversations. It pro-
poses a novel framework called ”role-playing” that
enables two agents to collaborate by taking on user
and assistant roles. The agents use a technique called
”inception prompting” to guide their conversations.
There is a long history of research into commu-
nication between intelligent agents, including using
natural language. Recent advances in large language
models have enabled agents that can talk among
themselves and provide an interactive experiences.
However, most conversational AI systems still rely on
human guidance, which can be challenging and time-
consuming. Cooperative AI explores how agents can
work together towards common goals, but designing
effective cooperative systems remains an active re-
search area. The main issue is to engineer prompts
and bring model into a context which is optimized for
the agent type. This paper introduces a novel frame-
work for autonomous cooperation between commu-
nicative agents.
The proposed role-playing framework assigns dif-
ferent roles to two agents, such as a ”user” giv-
ing instructions and an ”assistant” responding with
solutions. The framework uses carefully designed
prompts to initialize the agents, assign roles, and
provide protocols hence creating a context in which
the agents behave optimally. Once started, the agents
prompt each other automatically using inception
prompting in a loop until task completion which
helps them retain the context created and also helps
retain there original goal for a longer sequence. This
approach aims to achieve autonomous cooperation
with minimal human input.
The paper generates two large-scale conversational
datasets using role-playing: AI Society and Code.
Analysis of the datasets reveals common challenges of
role-flipping, repetition, flake responses, and infinite
loops. These findings highlight the complexity of
designing cooperative AI systems. The data provides
a valuable resource for studying agent behaviors and
language model capabilities.
In summary, the paper makes significant contribu-
tions around a novel framework for autonomous
agent cooperation, large-scale analysis of agent be-
haviors, and an open-sourced library to support re-
search on communicative agents. The work provides
important insights into designing aligned, helpful
agents that can collaborate effectively.
The authors thoughtfully discuss risks around poten-
tial misuse of unsafely designed agents. Future work
is needed to evaluate the framework’s effectiveness on
complex tasks. There are also scalability challenges
in analyzing large agent populations that require
further research. Overall, this paper opens up an
important new direction for designing cooperative
agents using language models.
E. AgentVerse: Facilitating Multi-Agent Collabo-
ration and Exploring Emergent Behaviors in
Agents[5]
The paper introduces AgentVerse, a novel frame-
work for facilitating collaboration among multiple
autonomous agents powered by large language mod-
els (LLMs). AgentVerse aims to simulate human
group dynamics for more effective problem-solving.
Creating cooperative multi-agent systems has been
an active research area, but designing agents that
can autonomously collaborate remains challenging.
There is a long history of research into creating
intelligent agents that can operate in real-world en-
vironments. Recent advances in LLMs like GPT-
3 and GPT-4 have opened up new possibilities for
powering autonomous agents with more human-like
capabilities. However, even the most advanced agents
today lack certain cognitive skills needed for complex
multi-step tasks.
Inspired by human groups, multi-agent systems
leverage distributed collaboration among agents to
accomplish shared goals more efficiently. But imple-
menting communication protocols that enable au-
tonomous cooperation has proven difficult. Recent
works have begun exploring LLM-based agents in
multi-agent settings but rely on fixed group compo-
sitions.
AgentVerse introduces four key stages - expert re-
cruitment, collaborative decision-making, action ex-
ecution, and evaluation - to simulate human col-
laborative workflows. It can dynamically adjust a
group’s composition based on the task and state. Two

=== PAGE 8 ===
8
communication structures, horizontal and vertical,
are implemented.
Quantitative experiments demonstrate AgentVerse
improves performance over individual agents on di-
verse tasks. Case studies highlight benefits in com-
plex scenarios like software development, consulting,
and gaming. Analysis of emergent behaviors reveals
both constructive and detrimental conduct, motivat-
ing further research into mitigating risks.
In summary, this paper makes important contribu-
tions around a novel framework for agent collab-
oration and analysis of emergent social dynamics.
Limitations include the lack of more capable individ-
ual agents and the difficulty of assessing efficiency
gains. Nonetheless, AgentVerse provides a valuable
platform for exploring multi-agent cooperation.
AgentVerse opens up an exciting new direction for
leveraging LLMs in multi-agent systems. As au-
tonomous agents continue advancing towards human-
level intelligence, understanding the dynamics of
agent collaboration will only grow in importance.
The principles behind AgentVerse offer a promising
path forward.
F. ReCode: Robustness Evaluation of Code Genera-
tion Models[6]
This paper proposes, a comprehensive robustness
evaluation benchmark for code generation models.
The authors collect and customize over 30 natu-
ral transformations in categories such as docstrings,
function names, code syntax, and code format to
create perturbations that are natural in practice
and preserve the semantic meaning of the origi-
nal prompt. They also propose general worst-case
robustness metrics to give a unified overview of
the model’s robustness performance. The authors
demonstrate the ReCode benchmark on popular
models including CodeGen, InCoder, and GPT-J
using HumanEval and MBPP datasets, and function
completion tasks derived from them. With human
evaluation, over 90% of the perturbed data were
found to preserve the original semantic meaning. The
authors also report that the best model robustness
performance was observed for CodeGen over InCoder
and GPT-J, and that models were found to be most
sensitive to syntax perturbations.
G. Execution-Based Evaluation for Open-Domain
Code Generation[7]
The authors propose ODEX , the first open-domain
execution-based natural language (NL) to code gen-
eration dataset. ODEX contains 945 NL-Code pairs
spanning 79 diverse libraries, along with 1,707
human-written test cases for execution. The NL-
Code pairs are harvested from StackOverflow forums
to encourage natural and practical coding queries,
which are then carefully rephrased to ensure in-
tent clarity and prevent potential data memoriza-
tion. ODEX supports four natural languages as in-
tents, in English, Spanish, Japanese, and Russian.
The authors use two state-of-the-art code generation
models, CODEX and CODEGEN, to evaluate the
dataset and it effectively unveils their varied behav-
iors between program domains and language con-
texts. ODEX serves as a more comprehensive code
generation benchmark given its open-domain cover-
age, multi-natural language queries, and multimetric
support. The authors also highlight the challenges of
creating test cases and reliable execution in open-
domain scenarios and hope that their dataset will
enable future work to tackle these challenges.
H. Programming Is Hard – Or at Least It Used to Be:
Educational Opportunities And Challenges of AI
Code Generation[8]
In this position paper, the authors argue that the
community of com- puting education needs to act
quickly in deciding how to leverage the opportunities
and overcome the challenges presented by AI-driven
code generation tools. They predict that software
development of the future will include an increasing
amount of auto-generated code, and this requires a
shift in emphasis towards code reading and evalu-
ating rather than code generation. Additionally, the
authors suggest examining the ethical implications
of these tools and guiding students through ethical
reflection. They state that without quick, concerted
efforts, educators will lose advantage in helping shape
the opportunities and challenges presented by AI-
generated code.
I. Coder Reviewer Reranking for Code Generation[9]
In this position paper , the authors propose a new
method for code generation called Coder-Reviewer
reranking. This method is inspired by collaborative
programming and it involves using two separate
models, a Coder model and a Reviewer model. The
Coder model generates programs given language in-
structions, while the Reviewer model evaluates the
likelihood of the instruction given the generated pro-
grams. The authors show through an extensive study
that Coder-Reviewer reranking leads to consistent
and significant improvement (up to 17% absolute
accuracy gain) over reranking with the Coder model
only. They also show that when combined with ex-
ecutability filtering, Coder-Reviewer reranking can

=== PAGE 9 ===
9
often outperform the Minimum Bayes Risk method.
The authors recommend the usage of this method
because it is easy to implement, can generalize to
different programming languages, and works well
with off-the-shelf hyperparameters.
J. DS-1000: A Natural and Reliable Benchmark for
Data Science Code Generation[10]
The authors introduce, a code generation benchmark
that contains a thousand data science problems from
the Python libraries NumPy and Pandas. The prob-
lems were collected from StackOverflow and reflect
diverse, realistic, and practical usecases. The bench-
mark also includes an automatic evaluation system
that is highly specific, checking for functional correct-
ness and surface-form constraints. Additionally, the
authors proactively defend against memorization by
slightly modifying the problems. They hope that DS-
1000 will facilitate fair comparisons between models
and track the progress of code generation research in
the data science field.
VI. Gap and Limitations of Existing Work
In recent years, the fields of natural language process-
ing and code generation have witnessed remarkable
advancements. Numerous studies have explored the
application of Large Language Models for a wide
range of natural language tasks, including text gen-
eration, translation, summarization, and more. Simi-
larly, LLMs have been harnessed for code generation,
simplifying the process of creating software through
automated code synthesis.
While these advancements are undoubtedly ground-
breaking, there exists a noticeable gap in the current
literature. Most existing research has predominantly
concentrated on the generation of code, from natural
language descriptions or the automation of specific
coding tasks. In these studies, LLMs have excelled at
translating human-readable specifications into func-
tional code snippets, often simplifying the software
development process.
However, the distinctive focus of this research lies in
the realm of code optimization. Unlike conventional
research, our work does not involve code generation
from scratch but rather centers on the optimization
of already generated code. This perspective intro-
duces a unique set of challenges and opportunities
that differ substantially from those addressed by
previous studies.
Specifically, the current researchgap we observed
what a way using Autonomous Agents to optimize
code for improved efficiency, readability, and main-
tainability. The concept of using agents to interpret
and enhance code, rather than generating it, rep-
resents a novel approach that still has not being
explored.
By addressing this gap, we aim bridge the gap be-
tween code generation and code optimization. This
unique focus is essential, as it tackles the real-world
challenges faced by developers in maintaining and
improving existing codebases, a task that consumes a
big portion of software development but has received
less attention in the existing literature.
VII. Overview of the Proposed Approach
Our approach aims to optimize entire Python code-
bases, decreasing the time and memory used through
a multi-agent framework powered by SOTA language
models. The will perform a sequence of steps, each
performed by an agents, to iteratively refine the
codebase.
A. Custom Parser: Extracting Classes and Functions
At the start, a custom parser is used to process the
input code base. We needed to create an interme-
diate representation from where can easily extract
standalone code snippets, get them optimized and
then reintroduce them into the codebase.
B. Testcase Agent: Generating Comprehensive Test
Cases
Following the extraction of code structures, we use a
Testcase Agent. This agent generates best, medium
and worst test case for the code. These test cases
act as a base for evaluating code time and memory
metrics which are used to evaluate the code on
different phases of the pipeline.
C. Profiler Agent: Analyzing Code Performance
Profiler Agent is utilized to collect performance data.
It provides us execution time for each line of the code,
this helps us identify bottlenecks which may not have
been apparent before.
D. Compiler: Assessing Total Execution Time and
Memory Usage
A Compiler Agent is used to compile the code and
gives information about the overall execution time
and memory consumption. This helps us create a
general context of the codes execution metrics which
ultimately helps us optimize it.

=== PAGE 10 ===
10
E. Optimization Agent: Enhancing Code Efficiency
This is the primary agent in our pipeline, which
utilizing the context created by the testcase, profiler
and compiler agent to optimize the code example.
This phase will increase the efficiency of the code
by using different techniques to reduce the time of
execution using a sophisticated prompt engineering
pipeline which gets updated in each phase of the run.
F. Performance Evaluation: Measuring Optimization
Impact
Following the work of the Optimization Agent, the
Compiler Agent is re-run with the same test cases.
In this stage we evaluate the optimizations we in-
troduced in the code and compare metrics of each
internal phase in the run.
This aids us to create a feedback loop, continually
refining the codebase. The approach is designed to
address the challenges and intricacies of optimizing
existing code, as sometimes the code can get slower
when using some optimization methods, aligning
with the goal of improving software quality and
reducing development effort. By integrating a custom
parser, test cases, profilers, compilers, and optimiza-
tion agents, this approach represents a comprehen-
sive solution for code optimization that reflects the
real-world needs of software developers.
VIII. Data Collection and Preprocessing
To initiate our research, we will undertake the es-
sential steps of data collection and preprocessing.
This includes acquiring existing codebases, which
will serve as the foundation for our optimization
experiments. Subsequently, data cleaning and for-
matting will be carried out to ensure the quality and
consistency of the code samples.
A. Acquiring diverse testcases
Acquiring diverse sets of algorithms which will act as
testcases is a fundamental step. This involves creat-
ing/finding computation heavy algorithms which can
act as a backbone for out evaluation process.
B. Code Test-Set
To be able to test the Optimization Agent we need
Computation heavy code which can be evaluated
using the compiler and the profiler all while the test-
case Agent can also write test-cases for it as-well. So
we compiled 27 algorithms which fit our use-case.
Fig. 1. Architecture Diagram.
IX. Agent-Based Framework for Code
Optimization
The cornerstone of our approach lies in the imple-
mentation of an agent-based framework designed to
optimize existing Python codebases. This framework,
comprising a network of intelligent agents, serves as
the engine that drives the code enhancement process.
A. Agent Roles and Responsibilities
Within this agent-based framework, each agent is
assigned specific roles and responsibilities to fulfill
distinct aspects of the code optimization process.
These roles are as follows:
1) Custom Parser Agent: Responsible for pars-
ing the input Python codebase, extracting
classes and functions, and creating a structured
data representation.
2) T estcase Agent: Generates test cases which
act as a foundation for our evaluation process
ranging from worst case to best case scenarios.
3) Profiler Agent: Collects performance data of
each respective line in the code example which
helps create a richer context.

=== PAGE 11 ===
11
4) Compiler Agent: Compiles the code and
provide data about the total execution time
and memory usage, acting as a benchmark for
performance evaluation.
5) Optimization Agent: The central agent in
the framework, this agent uses the context and
results provided by the rest of the agents and
uses that to introduce optimizations in the
code.
The flow between these agents create a metric driven
approach to code optimization. By utilizing the func-
tionalities of these agents in a shared context, the
framework strives to address the unique challenges
posed by optimizing existing code while maintaining
functionality and increasing the code’s efficiency.
B. Integration with Language Models
The incorporation of language models, like GPT-
3.5, GPT-4, or other open-source Large Language
Models, is a crucial component of our agent-based
system. These language models improve the skills
and intelligence of our optimization agents by acting
as the fundamental decision-makers.
1) Using LLMs as Decision Makers
The integration of language models empowers our
agents to make informed and context-aware deci-
sions during the code optimization process. These
language models have been trained on vast corpora
of text data, enabling them to understand natural
language descriptions and generate human-like text.
The structured data that the Custom Parser Agent
created is received by the optimization agents. These
models shed light on the functionality of the code and
suggest possible areas for development. They help by
coming up with ideas for programming, suggesting
improvements, and even enabling the code to meet
coding standards.
By leveraging LLMs as decision makers and set-
ting up context with tuned prompt engineering, our
framework gains the ability to analyze and under-
stand code in a more human-like manner. This, in
turn, enables the generation of highly relevant and
contextually appropriate code optimizations, con-
tributing to the overall success of our code enhance-
ment process.
2) Adapting to Different LLMs
Our approach is designed to be adaptable to various
LLMs, including both current and future models.
The choice of LLM can be tailored to the specific
needs and resources of the development environment.
This adaptability allows us to take advantage of the
latest advancements in the field of language models,
ensuring that our code optimization process remains
up-to-date and relevant.
The integration of language models enhances the
intelligence and decision-making capabilities of our
agents, providing a data-driven and context-aware
approach to code optimization, and allowing us to
harness the most powerful language models available
to achieve the desired results. But as the model gets
smaller the degree of improvement in the code is
smaller aswell and might even become negative.
X. Evaluating Code Optimization Metrics
Measuring the effectiveness of our code optimization
process is a basic aspect of our research. To find
the impact of optimizations on code efficiency, read-
ability, and maintainability, we define and apply a
set of performance metrics. These metrics provide
insights into the improvements achieved through our
approach.
A. Defining Performance Metrics
In order to quantify the results of code optimization,
we establish some performance metrics:
• Execution Time: This metric assesses the time
taken for the code to complete its execution.
It has an inverse relation with code’s efficiency,
as the time decreases the codes optimality in-
creases.
B. Baseline Comparisons
To evaluate our code optimization process, we have
created some baseline scenarios for comparison.
These baselines represent the performance of the
original code. By comparing the results of the opti-
mized code with these baselines, we can quantify the
degree of improvement and derive metrics towards
the efficiency of our approach.
The performance metrics are applied both before and
after optimization to measure the difference in code
quality. The comparison provides insights into the
benefits achieved through our process, ensuring that
optimizations do not compromise code functionality.
The observations we can make from these metrics is
a main component of our research, as it will quantify
the effectiveness of our framework in enhancing code
efficiency, readability, and maintainability.
XI. Implementation and Experiments
In this section, we detail some pre-requisites which
we used to setup an environment to run our experi-
ments.

=== PAGE 12 ===
12
A. Software Environment Setup
We take the following steps to set up the necessary
infrastructure:
• Hardware Specifications: We used APIs to
the LLMs in our experiments hence the hard-
ware requirements are pretty minimal. But if
when reproducing the experimental you decide
to use locally deployed LLMs, the hardware
requirements will depend of the size of the LLM
you choose.
• Software Dependencies: We install the es-
sential software dependencies, including the pro-
gramming environment, and language model li-
braries which is openai in our case.
– openai==0.28.1
– termcolor==2.3.0
– python-dotenv==1.0.0
– line_profiler==4.1.2
– psutil==5.9.0
– numpy==1.26.2
A well-prepared software environment ensures the
smooth execution of our experiments and facilitates
the systematic assessment of code optimization re-
sults.
B. Experimental Design
Our experiments are designed to evaluate the per-
formance and impact of our code optimization ap-
proach. Key aspects of our experimental design in-
clude:
• Code Optimization Scenarios: We define
a variety of code optimization scenarios, each
addressing specific aspects of code efficiency,
readability, and maintainability.
• Randomized Control Groups: We create
randomized control groups from the collected
Algorithms to ensure unbiased experimentation.
Control groups represent the unoptimized code
and optimized code for comparison.
• T est Data Generation: The Testcase Agent
generates a diverse set of test cases to cover
various execution paths including best, medium
and worst case, ensuring thorough evaluation.
• Agent Integration: We carefully integrate
each agent into the framework, ensuring coor-
dination among them during the experiments.
By implementing a structured experimental design,
we ensure that approach is evaluated across a spec-
trum of real-world scenarios.
C. Base Test-Cases
We use a collection of 27 computationally expensive
algorithms. This set of code serves as a foundation
for our evaluation process, allowing us to measure the
degree of optimizations which can be introduced.
Given our focus on applications tailored for pro-
grammers in production environments, we made a
choice to abstain from introducing self-imposed un-
optimizations into the test cases. This allows our
results to remain coherent, providing a realistic por-
trayal of performance across production scenarios
and avoiding unnecessary deviations caused by ar-
tificial constraints which may have been added.
1) V anilla Code (No Built-in Optimiza-
tions): The algorithms will be evaluated with-
out the incorporation of any built-in optimiza-
tions. This allows us to assess the inherent
computational characteristics of each algorithm
without external influences.
def insertion_sort(lst):
for i in range(1, len(lst)):
key = lst[i]
j = i-1
while j >=0 and key < lst[j] :
lst[j+1] = lst[j]
j -= 1
lst[j+1] = key
return lst
2) Built-in Styles, e.g., List Comprehension:
In this set of test cases, we will apply built-in
styles such as list comprehension etc to certain
algorithms. This represents a common practice
among programmers and provides insights into
the impact of using programming language fea-
tures on an algorithms efficiency.
3) Imported Packages for Optimization: An-
other part of our evaluation involves utilizing
imported packages designed for optimization.
This simulates real-world scenarios where ex-
ternal libraries are employed to enhance algo-
rithmic performance. It enables us to gauge the
effectiveness of specialized modules for compu-
tational tasks.
def tree_sort(lst):
from bst import BST
bst = BST()
for el in lst:
bst.insert(el)
return bst.inorder()

=== PAGE 13 ===
13
D. Code Optimization Scenarios
Our experiments encompass a range of code opti-
mization scenarios, which include but are not limited
to:
• Performance-Critical Code: Optimizing
code segments that are critical for performance
improvement.
• Readability Enhancement: Focusing on code
readability and adherence to coding standards.
• Domain-Specific Optimization: Tailoring
the optimization process to specific domains or
industries.
These diverse scenarios enable us to assess the ver-
satility and adaptability of our agent-based frame-
work in addressing real-world code optimization chal-
lenges.
E. Interim Data-structure for Test-Case Analysis
To perform the analysis of algorithmic performance,
we maintain interim data structures that capture
metrics for each testcase. These structures encompass
the following key elements:
1) Best, Medium, and W orst T estcases: For
each testcase, we keep the input configura-
tions corresponding to the best, medium, and
worst-case scenarios generated by the test case
agent. This categorization aids in understand-
ing the algorithm’s behavior across a variation
of inputs, providing information into its perfor-
mance characteristics.
2) Optimization Suggestions: Our interim
data structures include detailed suggestions for
optimizing each algorithm generated by the
optimize agent.
3) Execution Time Metrics: We measure and
record the execution times for the best,
medium, and worst testcases associated with
each algorithm generated by the compiler
agent. These metrics provide a quantitative
assessment of the algorithm’s efficiency under
varying conditions, which helps us observe how
the pipeline behaves with various testcases.
XII. Results and Analysis
In this section, we present the results of our experi-
ments and summarize the outcomes so the impact of
the optimization approach can be gauged.
A. Performance of Agent-Based Optimization
The performance of our agent-based optimization
approach is a central focus of our analysis. Key
findings include:
Fig. 2. High level representation of the interim ds
• Code Efficiency Improvement: We analyze
the impact of the optimizations on execution
time. Reduced execution time indicate improved
code efficiency.
• Enhanced Readability: Code complexity
metrics are evaluated to assess the readability
of the optimized code. A reduction in code
complexity indicates enhanced readability and
maintainability.
• F unctionality Preservation:We examine the
extent to which the optimized code preserves
its original functionality. No alterations to code
inputs and outputs are indicative of successful
optimizations.
The results of our performance assessment provide
a quantitative measure of the effectiveness of our
agent-based framework in enhancing code quality.
B. Comparison Across Different Language Models
An essential aspect of our analysis is the comparison
of code optimization outcomes across different lan-
guage models. We explore the influence of language
model choice on code enhancements. Our findings
include:
• Performance V ariation:We compare the per-
formance of our optimization approach when us-
ing different language models, such as GPT-3.5,
GPT-4, and open-source LLMs. Variations in
performance highlight the influence of language
model capabilities.
• Contextual Optimization: We analyze how
well each language model captures the context
and contextually optimizes code. This analy-

=== PAGE 14 ===
14
sis underscores the importance of context-aware
code enhancements.
The comparative analysis across different language
models aids in identifying the strengths and limi-
tations of each model and its impact on the code
optimization process.
C. Performance of Agent-Based Optimization
The following results and analysis presented in this
section collectively demonstrate the effectiveness and
versatility of our code optimization approach, high-
lighting the potential for significant improvements
in code efficiency, readability, and maintainability
across diverse codebases and domains.

=== PAGE 15 ===
15
TABLE I
Expanded Comparison of Phase Performance
Index Best Phase Phase1 Phase2 van_GPT-3.5 van_GPT-4
1 original code −6.7553 −3.8064 −2.5206 −13.1820
2 vanilla_gpt-4 20.0226 21.9698 19.9097 74.5873
3 phase 2 10.3035 10.3774 −1.0322 −4.5481
4 vanilla_gpt-3.5 −84.3537 −116.9053 4.6299 −12.7424
5 phase 1 82.3008 82.2784 −22.0025 −63.5959
6 original code −10.3750 −16.7500 −20.7813 −2.3750
7 vanilla_gpt-3.5 −41.2489 −35.0597 7.1074 5.0689
8 phase 2 −103.9896 50.8430 2.9684 3.9658
9 vanilla_gpt-3.5 0.2680 −3.0143 2.8418 −0.5444
10 vanilla_gpt-4 −12.6540 19.8776 12.2886 86.1817
11 vanilla_gpt-3.5 −113.1041 −17.2526 16.2907 Uncompilable
12 vanilla_gpt-4 −0.3864 −16.9738 −4.1914 6.8371
13 phase 2 −0.0160 0.0007 −146.5403 −146.5403
14 vanilla_gpt-4 −30.8907 −58.9879 5.5061 11.9433
15 vanilla_gpt-3.5 −5.1493 1.8905 18.0348 −21.3433
16 phase 1 41.0710 −8.7030 −253.6352 −22.2401
17 vanilla_gpt-4 93.5668 92.8956 Uncompilable 99.3575
18 phase 2 99.998 99.999 Uncompilable 99.9973
19 vanilla_gpt-4 16.5674 34.3608 18.5289 36.1821
20 vanilla_gpt-4 30.9298 25.9196 19.5359 99.7597
21 phase 1 99.7595 99.5866 44.7505 45.7157
22 phase 1 99.9990 99.9989 0.0008 99.9894
23 phase 2 12.9539 16.8340 Uncompilable −19.8975
24 phase 1 91.2524 −5.2675 5.3262 26.6434
25 phase 1 99.8474 99.8443 99.8406 99.8159
26 vanilla_gpt-3.5 45.6182 55.2735 69.1134 −30.2521
27 vanilla_gpt-3.5 −12.0092 −25.9238 3.9838 −18.5335
The provided table compares the performance of three different models, Optimize Agent Phase-1 and Phase-
2, Gpt 3.5 and 4, in improving a code dataset. The comparison is based on 27 different trials denoted by
the ’Index’ column. Each row of the table indicates how each model performed in terms of improvement
over the original code during different phases, like ’phase 1’, ’phase 2’, ’original code’, ’van_GPT-3.5’ or
’van_GPT-4’ . Improvement is quantified as a number, with positive values indicating an improvement and
negative values suggesting degraded performance.

=== PAGE 16 ===
16
original GPT-3.5 GPT-4 Agent-based
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
7 7
11
Wins
Fig. 3. Wins of each State.
In some instances, the generated code was not able to compile, which is denoted as ’Uncompilable’ in the
table. As per the table, ’Uncompilable’ results were present for GPT 3.5 for Indexes 17, 18 and 23 & for
GPT 4 in Index 11, but no such instance was observed with P1 and P2. Given the data that’s available,
let’s evaluate the models in three steps:
1) Compiling Performance: Noticeably, Optimize Agents Phase-1 and Phase-2 have no instances of
generating uncompilable codes. In contrast, GPT 3.5 and 4 had three and one case respectively where
it produced uncompilable code. So in terms of compiling performance, the Optimize Agents (Phase-1
and Phase-2) are superior.
2) Positive Improvement: Looking broadly at the data, it seems that P1 and P2 have performed
equally well with many positive improvements to the codes. However, vanilla models appears to show
more varied results ranging from strong positive numbers to negative scores.
3) Negative Scores: In the situation where a negative score indicates a performance worse than the
original code, Phase-1, Phase-2, and vanilla models have all experienced negative scores implying no
clear winner in this aspect.
To summarise, on a surface level, Optimize Agents Phase-1 and Phase-2 are better in terms of compiling
performance. Whilst for code improvements, a high level glance might suggest Phase-1 and Phase-2 being
more consistent than vanilla models.

=== PAGE 17 ===
17
XIII. Challenges and Limitations
While our code optimization approach exhibits
promise and potential, it is essential to recognize and
address the inherent challenges and limitations that
come with this innovative methodology.
A. Ethical Considerations
The application of artificial intelligence and language
models to code optimization introduces ethical con-
siderations. Challenges in this domain include:
• Bias and F airness: Language models may ex-
hibit biases, raising concerns about equitable
code optimizations. Careful scrutiny is required
to mitigate potential biases in the optimization
process.
• Data Privacy: Handling codebases from vari-
ous sources may involve sensitive or proprietary
information. Protecting data privacy and en-
suring secure handling of code is a paramount
concern.
• Intellectual Property: Optimizing code raises
questions about intellectual property rights.
Clear guidelines must be established to address
code ownership and licensing issues.
Adhering to ethical principles and ensuring respon-
sible AI usage are essential aspects of our approach.
B. Security Concerns
Code optimization may inadvertently introduce secu-
rity vulnerabilities. Security challenges encompass:
• Code Integrity: Optimizations should not
compromise the integrity and security of the
code. Ensuring that code remains secure after
optimization is a vital concern.
• Malicious Code Detection: Detecting poten-
tial vulnerabilities or security threats in op-
timized code is essential to prevent malicious
exploitation.
Vigilance in addressing security concerns is integral
to the success of our code optimization framework.
C. Practical Challenges in Real-world Deployment
Implementing our code optimization framework in
real-world development environments may encounter
practical challenges:
• Integration Complexity: Introducing our
framework into existing development workflows
may be complex and time-consuming. Compat-
ibility and integration with diverse toolchains
must be carefully managed.
• Resource Constraints: Code optimization us-
ing advanced language models may demand
significant computational resources. Managing
resource constraints in real-world scenarios can
be a challenge.
• Development T eam Acceptance: The adop-
tion of AI-driven code optimization may face
resistance or skepticism within development
teams. Addressing change management and en-
suring buy-in from developers is crucial.
Overcoming these practical challenges requires a
well-thought-out implementation strategy and col-
laboration with development teams.
While our code optimization approach holds sub-
stantial potential for enhancing code quality, it is
essential to navigate these challenges and limitations
effectively to ensure its ethical, secure, and practical
application in real-world development scenarios.
D. Ethical Considerations
We will discuss ethical considerations related to code
usage, privacy, and potential biases in the code op-
timization process. Ensuring responsible and ethical
AI usage is paramount.
E. Security Concerns
The potential security risks associated with code
optimization will be examined. We will explore how
to mitigate security vulnerabilities and ensure the
safety of code during the optimization process.
F. Practical Challenges in Real-world Deployment
Real-world deployment of code optimization tools
may face practical challenges. This section will ad-
dress issues related to integration into existing de-
velopment workflows and the adaptability of the
approach to industry-specific requirements.
XIV. Future Directions and Implications
Our research has far-reaching implications and opens
the door to exciting possibilities for the future of
software development. In this section, we explore
the potential avenues for further development and
the broader implications of our code optimization
approach.
A. Potential Applications Beyond Code Optimization
While our primary focus is code optimization, the
principles and techniques employed in our approach
can extend to a spectrum of software development
tasks. Future applications include:

=== PAGE 18 ===
18
• Code Review Automation: Our framework
can be adapted to automate code review pro-
cesses, enhancing code quality and adherence to
coding standards.
• Debugging Assistance: Language models can
aid in identifying and resolving software bugs,
streamlining the debugging process.
• Code Synthesis: Expanding the framework for
code synthesis, enabling the automatic genera-
tion of code based on natural language descrip-
tions.
These potential applications highlight the versatility
of our agent-based approach in addressing various
software development challenges.
B. Extending the Agent-Based Framework
The architecture of our agent-based framework is
modular and extensible. Future directions for en-
hancement and expansion include:
• Additional Agents: The incorporation of new
agents with specialized functions, such as code
security analysis or code migration.
• Multi-Language Support: Extending the
framework to handle code in multiple program-
ming languages, enhancing its adaptability.
• Machine Learning Integration: Combining
our framework with machine learning techniques
for even more sophisticated code optimizations.
These extensions will make the framework more pow-
erful and applicable to a broader range of software
development scenarios.
C. Broader Implications for Software Development
Our research has the potential to reshape traditional
software development practices. Implications include:
• Increased Development Efficiency: By au-
tomating code optimization and related tasks,
development cycles can be significantly stream-
lined.
• Reduced Maintenance Burden: The frame-
work’s ability to improve code readability and
maintainability can lead to reduced long-term
maintenance efforts.
• Accelerated Innovation: Developers can fo-
cus more on creative problem-solving and inno-
vation when routine tasks are automated.
The broader implications of our research extend to
transforming the software development landscape,
fostering a new era of efficiency and innovation.
In conclusion, our code optimization approach not
only holds promise for enhanced code quality but also
paves the way for innovative applications, framework
extensions, and transformative impacts on software
development practices. The future directions and
implications presented here highlight the far-reaching
potential of our research.
XV. Conclusion
Our research has explored a novel approach to code
optimization, utilizing an agent-based framework em-
powered by advanced language models. This ap-
proach addresses the complex challenge of enhanc-
ing code efficiency, readability, and maintainability,
especially in the context of existing codebases.
Through a structured methodology, we have success-
fully extracted code structures, generated compre-
hensive test cases, analyzed code performance, and
proposed context-aware optimizations. Our experi-
ments have demonstrated significant improvements
in code efficiency and readability while preserving the
essential functionality of the code.
The integration of language models, including GPT-
3.5, GPT-4, as decision-making engines for our
agents has proven instrumental in capturing con-
text and facilitating data-driven code enhancements.
These language models provide valuable insights and
context-aware code suggestions.
Furthermore, our approach is not confined to code
optimization alone. It opens doors to potential ap-
plications in code review automation, debugging as-
sistance, and code synthesis. The extensible nature
of our agent-based framework allows for the incor-
poration of additional agents and the expansion to
support multiple programming languages and inte-
gration with machine learning techniques.
The implications of our research reach beyond code
optimization, encompassing increased development
efficiency, reduced maintenance burdens, and accel-
erated innovation in software development.
While our work has showcased the promise and
potential of our code optimization approach, it is
essential to acknowledge and navigate the challenges
and limitations, particularly in the realms of ethics,
security, and practical deployment.
In conclusion, our research contributes to a growing
body of knowledge in the field of software develop-
ment, offering a new paradigm for code optimization.
It underscores the transformative potential of AI-
driven approaches and sets the stage for further
exploration in code enhancement, automation, and
innovation. As software development continues to
evolve, our work aligns with the vision of a more
efficient, readable, and innovative future for software
engineering.

=== PAGE 19 ===
19
References
[1] Wang, Lei, et al. ”A Survey on Large Lan-
guage Model based Autonomous Agents. ” Gaol-
ing School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin Uni-
versity of China, Beijing, China, 2023.
[2] Hong, Sirui, et al. ”MetaGPT: Meta Program-
ming for A Multi-Agent Collaborative Frame-
work. ” 2023.
[3] Park, Joon Sung, et al. ”Generative Agents: In-
teractive Simulacra of Human Behavior. ” 2023.
[4] Li, Guohao, et al. ”CAMEL: Communicative
Agents for ’Mind’ Exploration of Large Lan-
guage Model Society. ” 2023.
[5] Chen, Weize, et al. ”AgentVerse: Facilitating
Multi-Agent Collaboration and Exploring Emer-
gent Behaviors. ” 2023.
[6] Wang, Shiqi, et al. ”ReCode: Robustness Eval-
uation of Code Generation Models. ” 2022.
[7] Wang, Zhiruo, et al. ”Execution-Based Evalua-
tion for Open-Domain Code Generation. ” 2023.
[8] Becker, Brett A., et al. ”Programming Is Hard –
Or at Least It Used to Be: Educational Opportu-
nities And Challenges of AI Code Generation. ”
2022.
[9] Zhang, Tianyi, et al. ”Coder Reviewer Rerank-
ing for Code Generation. ” 2022.
[10] Lai, Yuhang, et al. ”DS-1000: A Natural and
Reliable Benchmark for Data Science Code Gen-
eration. ” 2022.
[11] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye,
Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David
Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry,
Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthe-
sis with large language models, 2021.
[12] Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing
Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang,
Zhaopeng Tu, and Shuming Shi. Encouraging
divergent thinking in large language models
through multiagent debate. 2023
[13] Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen,
Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu, and
Maosong Sun. Communicative agents for soft-
ware development, 2023.

=== PAGE 20 ===
20
XVI. Further Research Analysis
The experimental data showcases a diverse set of Python-based sorting algorithms and numerical computa-
tions, each optimized by different models (referred to as ”original code,” ”phase 1,” ”phase 2,”, ”van_GPT-
3.5” and ”van_GPT-4”).
To further observe the results obtained in our experiments we divide our test set into 3 base classes:
1) Basic Python: Includes algorithms implemented using simple loops and control structures with no
imported modules.
2) Intermediate Python: Comprises algorithms that leverage Python’s advanced built-in features like list
comprehensions and higher-order functions etc.
3) Advanced Python: Features algorithms that rely on imported modules alongside advanced datastruc-
tures.
We then derived some more observations from the previous information which led us to uncover some more
data.
A. Insights and Observations
Our findings reveal the following insights:
• Basic Python algorithms largely benefit from ”phase 2” optimizations, likely due to refined loop
transformations and other low-level enhancements which are iteratively added and improved over each
phase.
• Intermediate Python algorithms showcase a mixture of ”phase 1” and ”phase 2” as best performers,
suggesting that more advanced syntactic optimization can offer significant performance gains.
• For Advanced Python, ”phase 1” optimizations regularly provide substantial improvements. This could
be attributed to more effective use of built-in libraries and functions, possibly by identifying and
leveraging more optimized built-in alternatives.
• The vanilla models occasionally outperforms others, particularly in cases where optimization scope
within the original code is limited or when the original algorithm was already highly optimized. But
also provided uncompilable code for total of Four time for testcases belonging to Basic and Advanced
Python class.
Code Class Number of T est Cases Best Performing Model
Basic Python 13 Phase 2
Intermediate Python 7 Mixed (Phase 1 and Phase 2)
Advanced Python 7 Phase 1
TABLE II
Testcase Classes
B. Conclusion
The observations of the results show that there exists no one-size-fits-all model; instead, a blend of different
optimization techniques adapted to the code’s characteristics ensures the most efficient performance. Hence
our pipeline which passes the code through these multiple stages in the end possibly comes out with the
best result.